Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
We said...
You said that one of the reasons
was that your father
devoted more time to Ivica,
and you probably got fed up.
Is it...
Both you and Blanka Vlašić
had thyroid surgery,
and it can often cause problems
because of too much stress.
Is that...
And it seemed that you got
over it with ease. -Yes.
Can a young person handle
such great pressure?
You, who achieved
significant results,
were expected to keep
doing the same.
Is that also the reason
you got bored,
and maybe you weren't
even aware of it?
At one point, I acted lost.
That happened when I was about
to move from the junior
to the senior skiing category.
What happened was that I suddenly
lost around 20 to 30 kilos.
And I was very thin.
You only ate tangerines
and drank water?
Yes, and I ate popcorn.
I asked myself then, now that
I'm skiing in the senior level,
what does everyone want from me?
Okay, I know I'm good,
promising, healthy,
but why should I now...
I felt like I started doing
athletics instead of skiing.
As if I had started playing
a new sport, in approach.
During that period,
I felt a bit lost mentally.
I wasn’t sure what to do.
I needed to get stronger,
and then I’d come and see
other competitors looking serious.
I thought they took it seriously.
I didn’t know how to adapt.
At one point, I felt lost.
And then after that whole
season, as it was,
I felt weak and couldn’t
get any results.
After that season,
I started feeling better.
And I realized that what others
were saying didn’t matter.
For me personally. And that I had
to focus only on myself.
And keep thinking
the way I did before,
without letting outside
factors affect me.
I thought I knew nothing
about this new field.
They knew and told me
what I should do,
and I didn’t feel comfortable
because of it.
I didn’t want to do things
the way others said.
But at that moment you were
only 17, competing against
skiers who were 28 or 30,
or even older. -That's right.
That’s considered the highest
achievement in any sport.
After that, I acted a bit lost,
then I realized
I couldn’t go on like that.
And I started behaving
as I had before.
You always had a "national charge."
We know you didn’t like to defend
Croatia’s colors any more
than me or anyone else,
but the rest of us had clubs
and national teams.
You didn’t have a club,
you only had a coat of arms
that said Hrvatska or Croatia,
and you had an anthem.
From one side, that was great,
you had motivation.
But from the other side,
it was a lot of pressure.
Can a young person...
It wasn’t easy for you,
especially when people
were used to good results.
At that time, Croatia was
a young country needing proof.
I think that’s why it was easy
for people to like you.
However, it was hard to maintain that.
That was the problem.
But I maintained it
with good results.
That’s exactly what I mean. But those
results had to be achieved.
You have to know that I didn’t
always win downhill.
I have only one downhill win.
-But you were always on top.
I had a certain consistency.
Nobody is 100% successful,
but you were always among the best.
Every now and then you’d win
a medal, and we’d hear
the Croatian national anthem.
It was phenomenal how you
promoted your country.
But I think it was an additional
pressure at the same time.
You can only blame yourself
for that pressure, no one else.
You absolutely can’t blame
anyone else for it.
Not your father, not your mother,
not Croatia, nor the world.
Because you are the one
who skis. It would be...
I’ve never decided whether
it’s selfish of people
to put pressure on you,
or selfish of you, me...
Because it doesn’t matter to me
that someone else thinks
I should be first.
It’s because of people,
but hard to reach that level.
You simply realize it doesn’t matter
what anyone thinks of you.
Who cares? And why?
In theory, it sounds easy,
but in practice it’s hard.
I have a problem with that too.
-To understand it.
To struggle with both
failures and success.
Everyone has a problem with that.
But what you say is right.
But to achieve and maintain
not caring what others think...
Who can really live like that?
Maybe Ibrahimović?
Whatever others say,
he just replies he’s the best.
But he’s an exception.
Most people feel pressure
from duty and expectation.
I know, but people also must
understand that for me
it’s important to be the best.
I don’t need anyone to remind me,
because I already know it.
Let’s go back to skiing.
For any success, not only in sports,
work is essential.
But what kind of person
must one be to ski well?
What potential must they have?
It’s not just training that matters.
Talent matters too. -Yes, it’s important.
You must have a talent
for movement.
Motor skills are key,
like in football. Brain to leg.
If I found myself alone
in a stadium of 80,000 people,
I couldn’t even pass the ball to myself.
Because I’d feel scared.
And the great thing about skiing
is that you feel alone.
You’re not even aware
of the people around you.
You know they are there.
-I know, and I don't know what, but...
But you're not aware of it like when
you walk into a crowded stadium.
When I come to the stadium
as a fan and hear all that noise,
I’d just lie down on the field
and start digging with my hands.
But I tell the players
to just "switch off".
It's hard for me to "switch off"
at the stadium, but not when I ski.
Because while I'm skiing,
I'm moving fast,
and they're standing still.
People can tell me what they want,
but I simply reach the goal quickly.
And where can you escape
from the football field?
But I also run.
-Yes, but on the field.
You run left or right,
you can’t run out of the stadium.
All right. So motor skills are important,
and of course courage, strength, mass.
But the psyche matters too.
-Yes, of course it does.
Because everything
starts from the head.
A man can make his muscles strong.
But muscles alone can’t do anything
without commands from the brain.
You can be the strongest man alive,
but if you’re not mentally ready
and sure that you can lift the most,
no matter how easy it looks,
you just lift that weight.
Explain to us how you learn
how the course looks like.
It’s just routine work for me.
It’s very easy to learn.
People approach memorizing gates
on the course differently.
Some do it in detail, others don’t.
I always did it in detail.
I like to prepare well. I don’t like
when something surprises me.
And when something does,
I like to be ready for it.
So I can instantly offer
three solutions to the problem.
I know skiing, but not too much.
I got even more interested
while preparing for this interview.
You prepare for every race,
but things often happen
that you only discover
once you reach the track.
When we’d go to inspect the course,
preparing for slalom or giant slalom,
the coach was allowed to visit
the course one day earlier,
unless the weather didn’t allow it.
So it was often done
on the day of the race.
On paper, the coach draws the course
with blue and red gates. You can’t miss.
He tries to describe it on paper,
and this is called a "tunnel" in skiing.
The distance between blue and
red gates can be larger or smaller,
which means the rhythm changes.
On that paper, he tries to describe
as best as he can what awaits you.
So you think about it
before going to sleep.
And the next day, when you come
to inspect the course,
you’ve already memorized
about 50% of it.
You have visualization. -That’s right.
Then you learn the course faster.
Of course, when you come to
inspect the course, it looks perfect.
It’s "ironed", not a single mark on it.
But if you start 40th,
it’s no longer the same track.
There’ll be 40 holes,
and you have to adapt.
You only realize that once you see it,
once you’re actually there.
Yes, you only see it
once you’re on the course.
I’m at one gate, and 10 meters
away is the next one.
In those 10 meters,
in that one second,
I have to decide how I’m going
to go through that gate.
Is that instinct then? -If you do a lot
of repetitions, if you train a lot,
and especially if you train
under those kinds of conditions,
then you’ll adapt much more easily.
But if you only train on perfect slopes,
you won’t have that experience,
it’s basically a new discipline to you.
It’s still slalom, but it’s
a slalom with an extra element,
I don’t even know what to call it.
Sometimes the wind blows hard
and the terrain configuration shifts.
Or the sun comes out, or there’s fog,
at those altitudes it changes in seconds.
Exactly. The hardest conditions
to ski in are under diffused light.
Diffused light isn’t fog,
it’s when there’s a glare
from the opposite mountain,
or when the sun is behind your back.
You literally can’t tell whether
you’re on the ground or floating.
That’s the hardest part. But yes,
that’s where the approach changes,
and I’ve always been able to
compare myself with my brother:
the way he did things
and the way I did them.
We basically did
everything differently.
It’s such a complex sport,
and that’s shown, for example,
in the super combination, right?
In the morning you do a slalom...
Before, it used to be a great
combination, the real deal,
and then later they introduced
the super combination...
I think that was done to
make the sport more accessible,
to bring it closer to people
who might not be as exceptional,
to make it more accessible
to a broader audience.
Everyone wants to succeed and get
their opportunity, that’s how I see it.
But many of these so-called
"attractiveness" adjustments,
under the pretext of making it more
exciting, actually blur the line between
someone who’s truly high quality
and can solve problems when they appear,
and someone who’s just average.
For example, take slalom, it’s
the easiest to illustrate there.
Slalom courses used to be
completely different.
Not only were the slopes rougher,
no snow groomers or machines
to smooth everything out,
it was literally like a rodeo.
And they never used to set
the gates with measuring tapes.
And when you’re going downhill on skis,
you can’t really judge
whether something is 10 meters
away from you, or 9, or 8 meters,
but that difference matters
when you have 70 gates.
Now everything is done
with a measuring tape.
I take a meter and
measure everything,
you go up there, and if you know how to
stand on skis, you measure 10 meters,
plant the pole, drill the hole,
move on another 10 meters...
It requires no skill at all,
no real knowledge.
And then the skier standing
at the start, skis down that course
with the same rhythm from start to
finish. There’s zero skill involved.
If you shift just one gate slightly off,
or shorten the distance by one meter,
half of the competitors would be out
of the race. Because they don’t think.
Yes, yes. -They just go
automatically, from start to finish.
So, generally, I think sports,
at least some of them,
of course, you can’t put them all
together in the same category,
have started to function in a way
that brings the less skilled ones
closer to those who are truly
exceptional. -To make it more even...
They’ve lowered the standards a bit.
-Yes, yes, exactly.
But if we had those truly
challenging courses again,
half of the people who
suddenly appeared out of nowhere,
would simply vanish on those real
tracks. -Exactly. It's clear to me.
Of all those components, the mind,
motor skills, everything combined...
Where did you see yourself as being
better than others? What was it?
Or was it the whole package?
-I don’t think I was better in anything.
Then in everything? -I just made
better use of my abilities.
I probably learned how to use my
capacities more efficiently.
And that’s what makes you better.
To know your body, to understand it,
to know what it can do,
what your limits are,
and never go beyond them.
I never went beyond my limits.
-Do you have a limit?
Maybe once... When I fell, for example.
-You broke yourself, for God’s sake.
When I fell during that training
session, I was still young and playful,
it was fun, I had just won, and I got
carried away. I didn’t think too much,
I just let myself go, and that was a
mistake. I should’ve slowed down a bit.
I should’ve eased up on the tempo,
not rushed into that jump like that,
because I jumped much farther
than the others.
And the others, well,
that’s where experience comes in,
they were more experienced
and knew that jump was tricky.
I was a kid, I didn't know better...
I charged into that jump like a bull.
I know, yes... -So again,
experience plays its role there.
But we have to know ourselves...
I think it’s extremely important to work
on both your body and your mind.
You don’t have to be particularly
smart or intelligent to do that,
you just have to be realistic.
You have to know what
you can do and what you can’t,
and within what you can do,
try to get the absolute most out of it.
That’s something very individual,
it’s not universal.
But, I don’t know, people generally
prefer to deal with other people,
to analyze others, what someone else
does and how they do it,
rather than deal with themselves.
That’s just how I see it,
though I might be wrong.
True, and you also have
that versatility of yours.
You’re one of, what,
three or so female skiers
who have won in all five disciplines,
right? Which one is the hardest?
Can you even choose?
-The hardest is giant slalom.
Harder than Super-G? -Yes.
-Why? It looks the easiest to me.
Timing. I don’t know if I should
call it timing or the moment.
Giant slalom is specific because
the timing of entering a new turn
is absolutely crucial.
There’s only one person who truly
mastered that, well, after Ted Ligety,
maybe for a time, the American,
Ingemar Stenmark.
Everyone knows him,
even people who don’t follow skiing.
He was the man who skied
giant slalom with perfect timing.
Because depending on the distance
between the gates,
you basically must never
stop moving, that’s the trick,
but it’s incredibly hard to achieve
that in relation to that spacing.
In slalom, you automatically get
the rhythm from the course itself,
but here you have to create the rhythm,
to find that precise moment
when to finish one turn
and start the next.
That’s really difficult and demanding.
It’s a bit easier now
with modern carving skis,
but before, it was much tougher.
That’s why with giant slalom,
one day I’d be skiing for the win,
and the next day it was as if
I’d forgotten everything.
I could never find any sort of...
I don’t know... universal formula.
It drove me crazy, it was so frustrating
because I couldn’t figure out
a consistent solution.
So it’s really about feeling, right?
-Yes, it’s all about feeling.
That sense of... -Because in slalom
it’s clear... -There you have rhythm.
It’s almost mathematical.
Everyone knows where they should be,
it’s just about who’s faster, who’s
sharper... -Not exactly, but in slalom
everything happens within a certain
dynamic, gates come one after another.
In giant slalom, they don’t.
You have to either
add or take away tempo,
to find the right moment when to
end one turn and start the next.
So for me, giant slalom was the hardest.
As for Super-G and downhill...
Downhill is pure enjoyment.
You’re going fast, but you have
the time and space to act.
It’s difficult because of
the forces involved, of course,
but overall, there’s room, it’s not like
in slalom, where you have to react
in a split second or you’ll miss a gate.
In downhill, the gates are far apart,
and you have plenty of space
to choose your line.
So, for example,
I really enjoyed downhill.
Slalom was the one I liked the least,
yet it was the one I was best at.
Giant slalom was fun for me, but I could
never find the right formula for it.
Super-G was kind of neutral,
everything about it was fine.
Is the hardest race that one
they always talk about, the downhill,
the most dangerous one, the downhill
in Kitzbühel or something like that?
I’ve never raced there,
and I never will.
After I stopped skiing, I spent
some time with my brother’s team,
and I can tell you, those men’s
downhills and what they ski...
Something’s not right in their heads.
Seriously, it’s insane.
Kitzbühel is actually okay
compared to some others.
It’s not that going down
that slope is the problem,
the problem is going down fast.
You understand? -Yeah.
It’s like when you’re
driving a car on the highway,
if you’re going 120 or 130 km/h,
you don’t really notice the curves.
But if you’re going 230 km/h, suddenly
those curves start appearing everywhere.
Yes, 100%. -That’s the best
comparison I can think of.
I don’t know,
those men’s downhills...
Kitzbühel is tough, yes, demanding,
but then you have Bormio in Italy,
that one’s just deadly. I honestly
don’t know how those guys survive it.
Or Wengen, in Switzerland,
I don’t know if you’ve seen it,
there’s this jump located right between
the safety net and a rock wall.
It’s about twenty meters wide,
and you have to jump between
the wall and the net,
you can’t even see where you’re landing
and then, as soon as you hit the ground,
there’s a 90 degree turn.
I swear, if it were me, I’d get there,
sit down, and cry. I don’t see
any way to make it through.
I watch them and think...
On one side, you’ve got the safety net,
so you can either get caught in it...
And that’s your ligaments gone...
-And end up dangling like a flag
or you fall down one ravine,
or you get thrown off into another,
because after that point
there’s literally no course left.
It’s surreal to me,
that whole little "mouse hole".
Every time I went there, I’d say,
"Okay, I can ski the whole thing,
but here I’ll just take off my skis,
walk around, and then continue."
But, well, those are men’s downhills -
they’re on another level.
You’re known as someone who doesn’t hold
back. Anja Pärson said about you,
about your style, that when you have
a one-second lead after the first run,
in the second you still go all out.
No calculation. -Well, yes.
But do you realize... -Because
the others are good. -Sure, sure...
I mean, she’s good enough to make up
for that, sorry... -Right, but wait,
in the second run... let’s say you have
a one-second lead after the first run.
Halfway through the run,
which lasts a minute.
do you know... -No.
No. Do you know that you're good,
that you're first, and probably
at least a second ahead? -You don’t think
that way, about by how much you’ll win.
You just think about finishing...
Actually, my goal when I skied,
no matter how good I was, when I kept
winning slaloms all the time.
When someone asked what my goal was.
My goal was to make the second run.
It happened once.
I was great, OK.
I was injured, but when
you're good and at your peak,
you come back, and it never crossed
your mind you wouldn’t qualify.
Knowing your quality
and all the work you’ve done.
It happened to me.
That was such a slap,
that I realized it’s pointless winning
if I can’t prove I’m good.
When I came there, I think I was
34th or something, maybe I’m wrong,
then I thought, OK, from now on,
just make the second run.
Then I’ll fix it in the second run
if needed. -OK, first run’s over.
And you’re first. One second ahead.
Now you start last among those
who can threaten you. You start,
you know what they’re like, you know all.
You ski, and halfway down,
do you know you still have that lead,
because you’re skiing well... -You know...
-Then why not slow down a bit?
You know how much you risk. Because
a mistake can happen anytime.
And if you slow down, and then err,
you’re done. -If you push harder...
You must never lower your guard.
Never drop your guard.
You’re not skiing 100%,
but enough to keep your pace.
You can never predict a mistake,
if it will happen or not.
But if you drop your guard too much...
-I’m not talking about the guard,
I mean slowing down a little
so you don’t err. -No.
You control it. -But you already
control that before.
You always control it.
-I always control it.
For me, the key in skiing
was to make fewer mistakes.
They take away a lot of time.
That’s what I meant by efficiency.
You must always be ready
to make a mistake.
That you’ll need extra strength
and drive to fix it.
If you go like crazy until then
and waste all your energy,
you’ll have none left to correct
what you’ve done wrong.
My goal in skiing was to make
as few mistakes as possible.
Why let myself err
if I can be good enough,
say with 80% effort,
and keep 20% for a crisis.
Something like that. But you can do that
in individual sports, not sure in team ones.
In a team you can even more.
-You must still know yourself well.
You must know your abilities.
What you’re ready to do on which course,
or what’s possible. You must know
which course you like,
how it’s set up,
what doesn’t suit you best.
You must know what to do on which
part to minimize your weaknesses.
When you mentioned
course setting a few times.
What does that actually
mean in practice?
Your father was often called out by
Austrians, Swiss... -He set courses
where you had to think.
-That suited you.
What does that mean in practice?
Is there someone who approves it,
or can you set it as you wish?
There are rules you must follow.
You can place one gate here,
and another further down. -Yeah.
There are FIS rules for that.
Of course, they change over the years.
One year it was popular
to set slalom gates 15 meters apart.
That’s almost like giant slalom.
On the course you can place gates
from 8 to 15 meters apart.
Of course, if you place one gate
at 8, another at 15, then 8 again,
you break their rhythm. -Exactly.
-Not everyone can adapt to that.
Then it's easiest for people
to say that it's complicated.
Of course it's complicated,
make an effort. Think.
I never understood how my dad
was setting the course wrong.
He was doing exactly what
we do in training.
He made it fun. It's not like you just
put in a tape and it plays on repeat.
Like chicks that all
come out of the incubator.
That's terrible. -That gives
you room to be creative.
When everything’s the same,
creativity means nothing.
Because everything’s the same. -Basically
it’s like that... Like in super combined,
when you ski slalom at 10 a.m.
with one pair of skis, boots tied that way,
and at 1 p.m. it’s downhill where
skis are half a meter longer...
That’s a funny transition.
-How do you switch to that?
Downhill is usually run first.
The exception was at the Olympics
in Salt Lake City. Because of the weather,
slalom was first, then downhill.
That was actually a good thing
for me, how it turned out.
It really was...
A funny thing is when from 212 cm
skis you have to go to 150 cm ones,
that are 20 kilos lighter.
It’s literally like you wear nothing.
You’ve got slow legs because your fibers
are slow. In downhill nothing happens fast.
A different muscle group works.
In slalom, it’s the fast fibers.
In downhill you must be more refined.
You need a really good feeling.
In downhill, feeling is crucial,
in slalom you don’t need any.
You just hit as hard as you can.
What’s the role... No, how big is
the role of people we don’t see?
The team in the shadows. Technicians.
We know in Formula 1 you see them,
they prepare tires, the whole race,
right? The people in the pit stop.
And in skiing, ski size, wax,
length of poles and so on.
How much difference does that make?
Do you take part in it?
My technician was a magician.
I was lucky we came across
Jure Hafner. Before that I had some
other technicians, at first it was dad.
When we were kids, he did it.
When things got more serious,
you could get a technician
from the ski manufacturer.
When it comes to skis, he’s key.
Like everyone, you know that.
Every team member
has their own task,
which is no less important than,
say, what my dad does.
He’s not the head coach, of course,
but the physio, and especially the tech.
Huge, huge importance.
Very important. Enormous.
Even the person... I remember
in America it was -50.
You have to undress to your suit,
and ski down.
Even the person who just carries
your jacket - when I get down,
so I can get dressed.
It seems trivial, but it matters.
I’d reach the bottom half-naked
and have to ride the lift at -50.
Not exactly wow things,
but they matter in the end for success.
Without each of those little puzzle
pieces, there’d be nothing.
No one’s irreplaceable,
but we had a steady team
that worked really well.
In Croatia there aren’t many skiers.
We raced with Slovenians
and in their competitions.
When I was a kid, since
organized skiing in Croatia existed,
but there wasn’t much competition,
we were in the Slovenian region.
We competed with them.
It was great that they allowed us
to ski in their national
championship. -Yes.
Skiing is your sport.
Do you like other sports?
Which ones? -I like watching football,
because it relaxes me.
Why does it relax you?
It’s boring? -No, it’s not...
It has a flow that’s not too demanding,
but it keeps you engaged.
And still, if at one moment...
If the match lasts long, it’s fine.
If you look away for a moment,
you probably won’t miss much.
-100%. -You probably won’t turn
when the commentator yells
that someone’s close to scoring.
And that passing...
Maybe because I’m really bad
at football.
Handball I’m good at, with hands fine.
But football never...
It’d make more sense that link
head-feet works. -But no.
Two left feet. I just never
managed football.
Probably because I never could,
it fascinated me more. -Yes, yes.
What all you can do with it.
Those free kicks,
when the ball flies everywhere.
For me it’s like... how?
You kick the ball, it goes straight.
But it doesn’t, it bends and swerves.
And those precise passes. I don’t know,
Beckham, or Roberto Carlos.
That’s strange to me too.
It fascinates me how someone
can use the foot like a hand.
A hand’s a hand, you have control,
but with the foot you don’t have
that fine motor control.
Nor do you train it.
As a child, everything you do,
you do with your hands.
You develop fine motor skills
with your hands.
What would you do with your feet?
Play piano? Or draw with them?
You don’t develop that fine control.
You just walk and run.
Then you have to start. That’s what
interests me about football.
I kind of love all sports in general...
I even love watching figure skating.
Does that relax you? -Yes.
And gymnastics. I think it’s amazing.
And I absolutely love hockey.
See, I can’t watch hockey,
’cause my eyesight’s not that good.
I only realize it’s a goal
when they start celebrating.
Yeah. -I can’t see the puck.
You can’t see the puck either.
Come on, don’t tell me
you can actually see that puck!
Of course you can see the puck!
-When you’re watching live?
Well, that’s the thing... yeah.
The speed of the game, the decisions,
the movement, the coordination,
it’s all so tough.
It’s the connection between your eyes
and the space around you.
And it’s super aerobic.
-You’re using both your legs and arms...
It’s really hard to make all that work
so fast in such a small area.
It’s demanding.
-And with your heart rate at 200!
So tell me this...
A lot of athletes, especially champions
from individual sports,
say they’d struggle to adapt
to being part of a team.
They don’t like depending on others.
Earlier you mentioned
the handball goalkeeper, even the coach.
Do you think you could be
part of a team?
That’s a tough question.
I don’t think so.
Why not? -Not because of the team itself,
but because of the referee.
Wherever there’s a referee,
there’s injustice.
And referees are everywhere,
except in skiing.
For example, I’ll never understand
you football players.
When you start diving, wasting time...
There should be someone on the sidelines
who runs in, picks you up, and says,
"Come on, get on with it!"
Because honestly, it’s none of
my business, but I just don’t get it,
what do you gain from
wasting someone else’s time?
Because next time, someone’s gonna
waste yours, and you’ll be mad at him.
It’s that simple rule: "Don’t do to others
what you wouldn’t want done to you."
Alright, don’t take it that far.
-No, that’s just how it is. Period.
There’s no reason to steal someone’s time.
Who do you think you are,
to take away something
that belongs to someone else,
like the time left
until the end of the match?
You want to win, and sure,
that’s a bit Machiavellian.
The end justifies the means.
-Yeah, but you should win fairly.
A win that isn’t honest and fair
isn’t worth a dime.
I totally agree, in general, but it depends
on the situation, the context.
What you’re saying
is almost Nobel Prize-worthy.
But I think you just have
a special relationship with time.
Yeah. -You don’t really have opponents.
You’re always fighting against time itself.
That’s why you respect it so much.
Still, I think you’d be great
in a team sport.
I’m 100% sure of it. You’re a champion,
you’ve got all the leadership qualities,
but you’re also empathetic,
open, grounded.
I can work well with a team,
but some of those things...
You’d be captain, no doubt about it.
-...just don’t sit right with me.
They don’t sit well with me either.
I couldn’t handle it if something unfair
happened, not to me, and not to anyone else.
Like, say we’re playing handball,
and one girl hits another,
and the referee doesn’t call a foul.
I’d always be the one demanding justice,
and you’re not supposed to do that.
As my friend says:
"Where does the reckoning begin?"
Where does injustice actually start?
I could explain injustice to you,
or someone even wiser could.
You can find a hundred examples
of unfairness even in skiing.
You could say it’s unfair
the way a course is set up,
because it might suit you better
if the spacing in slalom
isn’t always the same,
if it’s not in rhythm. -I get that.
Yeah, there are a hundred
little things like that.
People simply want to win.
-But that’s not intentional unfairness.
So why do they waste time?
To break the other player’s rhythm,
to get a short rest, so the opponent
can’t score, so they can win.
Is that fair, is that honest?
-It’s cheap.
Maybe it’s not fair,
but it’s not rotten, either.
It’s not exactly sportsmanlike.
-I don’t think so. -But what is, really?
That’s why I think I wouldn’t cope well
in those kinds of situations.
As part of a team, sure,
I could fit in, no problem.
Skiing is an individual sport,
but you still have a team behind you.
Anči, Nika Fleiss and I used to ski together
under coach Jelušić, we were a team.
Even though we didn’t win medals as a team.
-Of course. But you were a team. Exactly.
And it’s normal
to help each other out.
You share information when you
reach the finish, what the course is like,
to make it easier for the others,
so they can adjust mentally.
Like: "Hey, there’s a rut there now,
I’ll need to change my line," and so on.
I’ve asked everyone this,
so I’ll ask you too:
Work and talent...
Without work there’s no...
What? -What’s the right balance?
It doesn’t have to be in percentages,
but without work,
there’s nothing, that’s clear.
Still, I think there’s too much
talk about that…
And you said a moment ago,
when we were talking about skiing today,
that everyone’s given a chance,
that according to public opinion,
anyone can do anything.
"The sky’s the limit."
Everyone can do everything,
but in my opinion...
Americanization? -Exactly.
But I don’t think it really works that way.
Not everyone can do everything.
-No, they can’t.
Everyone can do something, for sure.
But not everyone’s meant for everything,
and not everything is meant for everyone.
Right.
The hard part is recognizing that,
realizing you’re not made for something.
That’s a real blow.
It’s hard to accept that you’re simply
not capable of doing something.
It’s easy for me to say that now,
from this perspective,
because I was capable of doing it.
You know what I mean? -I do.
Some people just don’t have the capacity,
even if they try their hardest,
they just don’t. -But when we’re
talking about kids and parents,
there should be someone there
who can gently say,
"Maybe this isn’t for you,
but maybe something else is."
Because it’s a shame...
It’s not that I don’t want them
to be part of sports, it’s for their sake.
There are so many crushed dreams,
so much disappointment, even broken lives.
Because everything was pushed
in that one direction,
when that person might have succeeded
in another sport, or even another career.
Yeah, I get that. And you’ve wasted years
on something that, in the end,
didn’t bring any results, time you could
have spent on something else entirely.
I think you can be
as talented as you want,
but if you don’t work properly,
then that talent...
Absolutely, but the opposite is true too.
You can be the best version of yourself
through hard work, but will
you become Janica Kostelić?
Well, you’ve got to have
some luck too. -Luck, yeah.
Luck is a by-product
of well-organized effort.
Perfect. -There you go.
Tell me, how satisfied are you
with today’s sports in general?
Has it drifted away from its essence,
from what it really used to be?
Has it gone too far...?
-That’s a tough one to answer.
You can make arguments
both for and against,
so I couldn’t give a clear,
specific opinion.
Things change, and that’s normal.
It’s like if, back when I was skiing actively,
we had sat down and talked about
what skiing was like 50 years earlier.
Things evolve and sport
has to evolve along with them.
Doping? -Disgusting. -Disgusting, really?
-Yeah, I just don’t get it.
Top-level sport... -It’s very common,
especially in individual disciplines.
Yeah, but not really in skiing.
-No, not much in skiing.
At least, I’ve never heard of it.
But in elite sport we have to
understand that there’s
a big difference between recreational
and professional sport.
Professional sport is honestly
one of the unhealthiest things
you can do to your body,
because you’re constantly pushing it
to limits that aren’t natural.
So even that basic realization
that you’re doing something
where you’re intentionally hurting yourself
just to compete at the top level,
that already says enough.
You’re exhausting yourself every single day,
and then on top of that,
you put substances into your body
to destroy yourself even more.
How is that even possible?
I just don’t understand it.
Just to run faster?
That’s exactly where this idea fits in:
not everyone’s made for everything.
If you can’t accept that you’re
not meant for something,
then you reach for doping.
But what does that medal mean to you then?
If you have to live your whole life
knowing you didn’t achieve it
with your own potential?
Well, you did, but something
helped you get there.
You could try to justify it that way,
a bit of reverse psychology.
But to me, it makes no real sense.
You’re just damaging yourself even more.
If you’ve chosen to dedicate your life
to professional sport,
something that’s already hard,
both mentally and physically,
and then you go and take
these artificial substances
to wreck yourself even further,
there’s just no need for that.
You said earlier that times change
and that it’s not useful
to compare eras, but you once made
a really interesting statement
that I’d like you to explain.
You said you’re not sure
you could achieve today
what you achieved back then.
-Yes, I did say that. -And?
Yeah... my character, my personality,
they’re not modern.
I’m not sure people will get what I mean,
but I’m kind of old school.
You mean off the slopes?
No, I mean especially when it comes
to the pressure of social media.
So yeah, off the slopes
you wouldn’t do so well.
Back then, you had TV,
you had newspapers,
and you had expectations.
Nowadays, everyone online feels
entitled to form an opinion about you.
And for someone young,
just starting out,
someone who’s still
trying to find their footing,
like I was at the beginning,
that can be really destructive.
It’s dangerous, honestly.
Because suddenly,
someone sitting on their couch
is telling you how much you’re worth.
-And you know it’s happening.
Sure, you might know your own value,
you might know who you are,
but it’s hard to stay grounded
in the middle of all that noise.
And you know what that person thinks,
because they’ve left a comment.
I think it’s all incredibly hard to deal with.
I don’t even have Instagram,
or Facebook, or any of that.
It’s fun to check in on
a few friends sometimes,
but following all those
"important" people on social media...
well, now everyone’s suddenly important.
You are active in working with children.
You are the mother of two sons.
What do you recommend to parents
and children when choosing a sport?
I assume that sports are good, right?
-I’m not an expert.
Will you direct your sons towards
sports? -I have a son and a daughter.
A son and a daughter, yes.
-Of course, I direct them towards sports.
But it’s not sports, they play there.
They go play football.
For them, all of this must be
in the form of entertainment.
I think that sports have
become too serious too soon.
I watch my nephews...
They have chosen football.
That's great, but I don’t know
why boys opt for football.
It is very difficult to succeed in it.
Out of ten of them,
nine of them play football.
There’s huge competition and
a lot of money in the game.
It goes together. But I guess
you choose it because you love it.
I think that serious sports take away
a part of children’s childhood.
One hundred percent correct.
Because a seven or eight-year-old
doesn’t need to spend so much time
in a serious system of some
kind of game,
because he’s not mature enough for that.
That should be more optional.
Games? -Playing that league
at 7 or 8 years old, those goals...
Parents pay 200 euros to score a goal?
-Everything is paid for.
Ultimately, it’s not the children’s
fault, it’s the parents’ fault.
Children don’t raise themselves.
Parents raise their children.
We raise them.
It’s not even the parents’ fault,
because if the system is so complex,
that children start at six years old,
your child can’t train at nine.
Maybe he can at 12?
My daughter Sofi trains taekwondo.
She’s 10 years old. She just started.
She trains five times a week.
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday.
At the best taekwondo club
in the country.
The club won a lot of medals.
It’s fantastic! I’m happy about it.
I’m proud that she trains.
But do you have to train every day?
Then I find out that some of her peers
train twice a day.
I’m not for that. -We didn’t train
that much. -We didn’t.
Yes, those were still romantic times.
That’s one of the reasons why
I think it’s wrong.
There’s too much pressure on these kids.
Just like with these mobile phones.
Parents give smartphones
to their kids.
They expect a seven-year-old
to know how to use
the phone properly and sensibly.
They’ve given kids a responsibility
that they can’t handle.
And then the children are to blame?
How are they to blame?
So don’t give him a smartphone.
Give them a regular one, just to call.
There’s too much responsibility on kids.
-That’s true.
There’s too much responsibility.
They have to be emotionally mature.
They have to do this,
they have to do that.
They have to excel in school.
They have to excel in everything!
Because if they get an A in Croatian,
or a B in Math,
then the whole world has failed.
We expect too much from children.
Sport has become too serious
and it’s too early to train.
Not only that, there’s also
individual training.
Everyone wants a piece of the pie.
Everyone wants to be part of it.
And then there’s nutrition...
-But you don’t do sports for that?
You ate bacon, onions...
Garlic, right?
We ate whatever was offered.
-That’s right.
Today’s kids have everything
at their fingertips
and they have too much of everything.
We can’t expect them to be creative
when everything’s handed to them.
They don’t have to think about anything.
Before, when you traveled somewhere,
you had to have a map.
You had to think about where
you were going and follow it.
Now you sit in the car like a suitcase.
And you get from point A to point B.
As for children and smartphones,
you’re right.
They don’t need a phone at age six,
But when they’re nine, ten, or eleven,
when they have friends...
I’m not there yet. -You’re not,
but your kids will get there too.
It’s hard to find a balance.
You don’t want them to be
different from the others.
Of course, I believe it’s hard.
She wants to be part of the group,
part of the team. -Of course, it’s hard.
But I guess it depends on your
relationship with your child. -Yes.
How will you manage to gain your
child’s trust and have them trust you?
That takes time and energy which
you have to devote, of course.
You said that no Olympic medal
is as exhausting as raising children.
Yes, motherhood.
-And that no day is the same. -Yes.
As an athlete, everything is organized
for you to reach your full potential.
One person carries one thing for you,
another person carries something else,
you just have to bring your own things.
You don’t even have to think
about what you’re going to eat.
You only have to think
about basic needs.
Going to the toilet and sleeping.
You don't think about anything else.
Nobody interrupts you
in what you're doing.
And this? It’s completely different.
Every second, someone asks you
something, bothers you.
You can't sleep when you want.
You can't do whatever you want...
There's no continuity or rhythm.
You never know how the child will react.
-Everything is a challenge?
Everything is a challenge, literally.
We're all parents, we're all moms,
and there's no drama there.
But it's demanding.
I can give my child a cell phone,
when I want to drink coffee in peace,
but I know it's not good for him.
You don't do that, right?
-No, never. -Never? -Never.
My children don’t have cell phones,
but they're still small.
Seven and two years old.
When you come to a restaurant
and want to eat something in peace,
half an hour is enough...
No, I'm the kind of mom
who runs around.
And eats something along the way.
-Really? -Yes, and I’m catching the kids.
Tell me, what you've learned from
sports, what has sports given you?
What is it?
A strong character.
I don't know if it's sport
or a way of life?
Sport definitely has an influence.
After your career, you briefly
tried politics, right?
Yes, that was in 2016.
-In your field.
You were an advisor
to the Ministry of Sports.
That's the first and only time you've
experienced some unpleasant moments.
That's inevitable.
-I don't care about that.
Does it bother you that society,
not just ours, is divided?
It seems that the only chance to remain
like the heroine is to do nothing?
Or to die?
A person makes mistakes
when they work. -Too bad!
Whatever you decide to do,
people will judge you.
It's who says what, not what they say.
-Let's say that's the case.
That was an interesting period.
When I do something,
I try to do it conscientiously.
But politics is strange.
And it has nothing to do with sports.
I thought politics shouldn't be
part of sports.
But what disappointed me
the most were the many athletes,
who I thought shared my views.
Unfortunately, I've met few of them.
-That's too bad. That's good for you.
But also for the country,
especially for the children,
if they had such a person...
It would be good if there
were no politics in sports.
"Sports politics" could be
a special department at a university.
Politics itself has no meaning.
Literally, sometimes it's as if politics
decides how many minutes
will be played in a match. -Yes.
Or how many overtimes there will be.
How long the referee will allow extra time.
Everyone thinks that if you give them
money, they'll get results.
But results don’t come from money,
they come from hard work in training.
That's what you should worry about,
not whether you received
100 or 200 euros more or less.
Politics and sports have
become a business,
that's why they go hand in hand.
Jana, we could talk for hours,
but it's best to stop,
just like you stopped your career,
simply and gracefully.
Thank you very much and goodbye.
-Thank you very much.